

Title: Automated Computational Pathology to Assess Degenerative Disc Histology
Authors: Richard D Bell*, Evie C Reddick*, David Lillyman, Fei San Lee, Rebecca Wachs
*Authors contributed equally

Abstract 
Background: Chronic low back pain (LBP) constitutes a significant global burden that is strongly associated with disc degeneration. However, the underlying cause of chronic LBP remains elusive and thus preclinical models of disc degeneration are important tools to discover disease pathology and test therapeutic approaches. While histopathology remains central in understanding these pathologic changes, quantitative analyses remain reliant on expert pathologists or panels of graders using time-consuming scoring systems that are conducive to inter- and intra-scorer variability. The integration of computational pathology can improve and streamline this process by leveraging machine learning (ML) algorithms to eliminate scorer variability and automate quantification. Thus, the goal of this project was to build a 7-tissue segmentation model of the disc that allows downstream pathologic quantification to recapitulate historical scored measures.
Methods: Hematoxylin and eosin-stained motion segment sections were collected from four independent studies. Each section was digitized to create a whole slide image. Each studied performed a disc puncture with a 0.5 mm dissecting needle to puncture and sweep across the L5-L6 disc bilaterally either 1X (1X-Scrape or 6X (6X-Scrape) in Sprague-Dawley rats. In Studies #2 and #3 rats were treated with either a vehicle control, treatment #1 (Trt #1), treatment #2 (Trt #2), treatment #3 (Trt #3) or treatment #4 (Trt #4). To build our segmentation model we utilized an active learning technique to reduce the total annotation time and training set size. This was composed of four rounds of 1) collection annotations, 2) performing a stratified random split of 70% Training Set : 30% Testing Set, 3) building a model starting to collect a total of n=45 slides with 7 tissues, 1) Nucleus Pulposus (NP), 2) Anulus Fibrosis (AF), 3) Endplate, 4) Ligament, 5) Bone, 6) Growth Plate, 7) Granulation tissue. Training and Testing was performed only in Studies #1 and #2. A deep convolutional neural network (UNET++) was trained to infer tissue segmentation on these annotated slides and the mean Intersection Over Union (mIOU) was calculated to measure performance using the Test group. After four rounds of training, optimal performance was achieved, and the model was used to infer tissue segmentation on whole slide images in Studies #3 and #4 (n=48). After tissue segmentation, the area and shape of each tissue was calculated as well as the number of cells via nuclei detection. These calculations were then correlated with histologic scores obtained using a standard histological scoring system.
Results: The segmentation model was highly performant with an mIOU and fwIOU of 0.83 ± 0.04 and 0.94 ± 0.02 in the Test set, respectively. The ML derived measure correlated well with histologic scores, with absolute ranges from rho = 0.65-0.87. Further, these ML derived measures were significantly altered with disc degeneration with significant decreases in NP cell number and NP area ratio; while there were significant increases in NP/AF Border, NP Roundness and AF perimeter. Lastly, we developed our model to measure additional tissue changes not captured through a standard histological scoring system. This allowed for the detection of differences in AF Area Ratio, Granulation Area, AF Cell Number, Bone Area, and Ligament Cellularity.
Discussion: Herein we developed the first computational pathology model to phenotype disc degeneration tissue. Our modeling is largely consistent with histopathology scoring algorithms but can provide more specificity and is dramatically more efficient. 
